Do you sometimes feel completely overwhelmed when life's problems cause you anxiety?
Just trying to provide the necessities for one's family can lead to anxiety.
At the same time, you might be dealing with a chronic or life-threatening illness,
caring for a sick or elderly relative, grieving the death of a loved one, loneliness,
a natural disaster, or maybe you're struggling with the devastating effects of past or present abuse.
Now, you firmly believe that God's kingdom will fix these problems, but that's in the future.
What about today?
Perhaps you feel like David, who prayed at Psalm 13 and verse 2,
how long will I have anxious concern with grief in my heart each day?
A sister who has struggled with anxiety for many years wrote this.
Anxiety robs me of sleep, impacts my health, affects the way I treat others, and makes me want to give up.
She added,
anxiety is like a monster that lives in my body somewhere between my heart and my belly.
I cannot wait for Jehovah to kill that monster in the new world.
But until then, the monster snarls and tears at my insides and tries to take over my life.
Can you identify with her feelings?
We often hear a person say concerning anxiety, I'm just trying to take it one day at a time.
But one brother put it this way.
I try to take it one day at a time, but sometimes several days attack me at once.
For so many of us, anxiety is a daily struggle.
If you battle with anxiety, please know this.
You are not alone. Do not give up the fight.
Jehovah and Jesus are aware of the anxieties that weigh on your mind and that are deep in your heart.
The governing body knows that living in this system of things is especially hard to deal with.
So the theme chosen for this program is, deal with anxiety one day at a time.
First, what is anxiety?
In the Christian Greek scriptures, the word anxious occurs 19 times.
The first occurrence is in Jesus' sermon on the Mount.
Now Jesus knew that people worried about how to provide for their family.
So at Matthew, chapter 6, and verse 25, he gave this wise counsel.
On this account, I say to you, stop being anxious about your life as to what you eat or what you will drink.
Or about your body as to what you will wear.
Does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing?
The study Bible, note for verse 25, says the degree term for anxious can refer to worry that divides a person's mind and distracts him, robbing him of joy.
At Luke 12, verse 29, Jesus says to stop being an anxious suspense or to stop worrying.
The study note here says that the Greek word for anxious suspense was used to refer to ships being tossed at sea.
It says that Jesus used it figuratively for being anxious or unsettled as if tossed about or wavering because of doubt and anxiety.
By saying, stop being anxious, Jesus recognizes that anxiety is already in progress.
He is very aware of our imperfect nature.
He knows that we tend to bring our worries from yesterday, the wood haves, could haves, and should haves, and our imagined worries about tomorrow, the what ifs, to today.
But ask yourself, how often have I word myself sick about what might happen tomorrow only to find that tomorrow wasn't nearly as bad as I feared it would be?
Jesus also knows that anxiety can have real, sometimes painful consequences.
It can stop us from making spiritual progress.
Overthinking and over analyzing our problems can literally shut us down.
How though can we stop being anxious? What's the antidote?
Let's consider four practical things we can do.
First, rely on Jehovah and take one day at a time.
This is exactly what Jesus prescribed for us at Matthew chapter 6 verses 33 and 34.
Keep on then seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.
So, never be anxious about the next day for the next day will have its own anxieties.
Each day has enough of its own troubles.
Verse 34 has a study note telling us that undue anxiety about what may happen in the future can adversely affect a person's relationship with God, causing him to rely on his own wisdom rather than on God's.
So what's the lesson? Instead of relying on ourselves, rely on Jehovah and take one day at a time.
Across reference to Matthew 634 takes us to Exodus 16 verse 4.
In this account, Jehovah provided the Israelites with enough mana for every day of their 40-year trek.
Could Jehovah have provided a week's worth of mana?
A month's worth, a year's worth, of course.
So why did he only provide enough for each day? Well, think about it.
When they stepped out of their tents each morning, there was no question whether there would be mana on the ground or not, and there was no question where it came from.
Jehovah never failed to provide for their needs, not even for one day.
They also knew from the past that Jehovah always provided for those who were loyal to him.
We too can look back at how Jehovah provided for his servants.
We can have complete confidence that Jehovah knows exactly what we need when we need it, for today, tomorrow, and for all eternity.
Even if we have such confidence, why do we sometimes continue to feel anxious?
The simple answer, we're imperfect people trying our best to serve Jehovah in Satan's wicked world.
Daily challenges cause anxiety that can make us forget to rely on Jehovah and take one day to time.
So we need to add our second way to deal with anxiety.
Pour your heart out to Jehovah in earnest prayer.
Read with me the reassuring words at Philippians 4, verses 6 and 7.
Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication, along with Thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God.
And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
Paul doesn't simply tell us not to be anxious, but he tells us how.
He said by prayer and supplication, which is earnest and specific prayer.
With what benefit the peace of God will guard your hearts.
Guard was a military expression referring to troops assigned to protect a city.
The inhabitants could sleep soundly knowing that soldiers were guarding them at night.
In a similar way, when we have the peace of God, our hearts and minds can rest.
This can prevent us from being overwhelmed by anxiety or discouragement.
How reassuring are the words of the Psalmist at Psalm 4 and verse 8.
I will lie down and sleep in peace for you alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.
So when we feel trapped, like there's no way out of our worries, the peace from God gives us hope that there's light at the end of the tunnel.
What though must you do?
Turn your worries into deep, heartfelt prayers.
In fact, at 1 Peter 5 and verse 7, Jehovah invites you to throw all your anxiety on him and leave it with him.
Because he cares for you.
Jehovah is the one person who truly understands how you feel.
He knows every moment of your life, why you feel or react a certain way.
He loves and values you personally, despite your imperfections, your anxieties, your cares and worries.
He not only has the power to help you, he wants to.
Knowing this should move you to pray specifically, expressing your deepest emotions, and plead that he grant you peace of mind and heart.
To the extent you do so, 1 Peter 5-10 promises that he will make you firm.
He will make you strong. He will firmly ground you.
Never underestimate the power of prayer.
Jehovah is always ready to help you one day at a time.
Our third way to deal with anxiety is to read and meditate on God's Word.
Let Jehovah speak to you. Allow Jehovah's thoughts to become your thoughts.
At Psalm 94-19, notice how this psalmist admitted his own anxiety.
When anxieties overwhelm me, you comforted and soothed me.
Yes, even servants of God can feel overwhelmed by anxieties, or as one translation says, burden with worries.
That in itself is comforting, that an inspired Bible writer struggled with anxieties.
But Jehovah comforted and soothed him, calming his troubled heart.
God can do the same for us through his inspired Word of the Bible.
Remember, the Bible is how Jehovah speaks to us.
Rather than allowing our emotions to run wild, we can learn to focus our mind on upbuilding things,
such as what the Apostle Paul listed at Philippians 4 and verse 8.
Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern,
whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chased, whatever things are lovable,
whatever things are well spoken of, whatever things are virtuous,
and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering these things.
The footnote to verse 8 shows that considering involves thinking about or meditating on.
We can and should meditate on positive things from the Bible, replacing negative things that may enter our mind
and cause anxiety.
Ask Jehovah to help you to find passages in his Word that will soothe your heart.
Ask others what scriptures have calmed their heart during anxious moments.
Make your own personal list, then set aside time to read and meditate on those passages.
Meditation is the doorway to your heart.
Meditation lets God's thoughts affect you on the deepest possible level.
Imagine that Jehovah is speaking directly to you because he is.
Never underestimate the power of God's Word, of letting Jehovah speak to you.
Our fourth way to deal with anxiety is to share your feelings with a trusted friend.
Proverbs 12, 25, says, anxiety in a man's heart weighs it down,
or as a footnote says, depresses him.
But a good word cheers it up.
A good word can come from a fellow believer who is motivated by God's Spirit and guided by his Word.
When the Apostle Paul was alone in prison, he prayed for encouragement,
and Jehovah provided what he needed to cheer him up.
With a heart full of appreciation, he said at Colossians 4-11,
that my fellow workers had become a source of great comfort to me, or a strengthening aid.
What can you do if you feel weighed down or imprisoned by anxiety?
Like Paul, pray for encouragement.
Pray for someone you can talk to.
Someone you can trust with your feelings.
The answer to your prayer may be an elder or a mature Christian brother or sister.
But what if it's difficult for you to open up to others and confide in them?
Try the advice in the March 1st, 1997 Watchtower article,
are you afraid to trust others?
When confiding in someone, it says, reveal your concerns gradually.
If he or she responds in an appropriate sympathetic and discrete way,
you might then try disclosing more.
Even if it takes some effort, never underestimate the power of our brotherhood.
Jehovah can use a fellow worshiper to ease your mind of anxious concern.
Even at times when there's no one to talk to, we can let the experiences,
upbuilding music, and talks on JW broadcasting be like an encouraging hug from a trusted friend.
Yes, when we make the effort, we give Jehovah something to bless.
Jehovah can help us conquer the seemingly incomparable.
That may not mean that we'll completely eliminate anxiety,
but we can learn to take control.
How? Remember our four ways.
First, rely on Jehovah and take one day at a time.
Second, pour out your heart to Jehovah in earnest specific prayer.
Third, read and meditate on God's word.
Let Jehovah speak to you.
Fourth, share your feelings with a trusted friend.
With Jehovah's help, you can deal with anxiety one day at a time.